[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Good morning, everyone.
Thanks for coming to
this workshop today,
and I'm really excited to
be sharing with you some--
how many of you have
been watching my Gaia
series "Mystery Teachings?"
OK, and did you get all
the way through season two?
OK.
Because today is
very much about what
I addressed in the second
half of season two,
but we're going to
really experience it.
So for those of you who
are a little newer to me,
my passion really is in bridging
science with metaphysics,
with spirituality, but in a
way that is really practical
and applied where we can take
these tools into our life
to create transformation,
to make a difference,
to awaken more of our
potential, and really access
those gifts that are within us.
So today is a little
bit of an experience,
a little bit a taste of that,
as well as a lot of teachings
to help pull together
all the different aspects
of our amazing brain,
neurological system, our mind,
our consciousness, and
how it all ties together.
And what we're going to
be talking about today
is very much about something
called the connectome.
Does anyone know what
the connectome means?
I didn't either until
I read about it.
The connectome is
the connections,
the neural networks that
connect between different brain
regions.
So you have-- for
example, we've mostly
heard about the
hemispheres, right?
We have our right brain
and our left brain,
or our right hemisphere
and left hemisphere,
and between those
two hemispheres,
there's a connective circuit
called the corpus callosum.
So that's one
example, but you also
have different
connection circuits
between different areas
of the brain, deeper areas
of the brain, and so forth.
And what scientists
have been finding
is that when we have
high connectivity,
when we have really good,
strong, high connectivity
between these different
areas of the brain,
we are accessing more
of our potential,
we're creating more
success in our life,
we're able to perform
at higher peak ability,
but on the reverse, when
we have low connectivity
between these different
regions of the brain,
then we tend to get more into
negative traits, like drug
abuse, or anger issues, or poor
sleep patterns, and so forth.
So the connectivity within
our brain really matters.
And we are amazing beings.
We have so much potential.
We're only tapping into maybe
3% of our DNA to actively use it
for awakening our gifts.
I mean, we have super
immunity within us.
We have ability to regenerate
limbs within our DNA.
We have so much
ability within our DNA,
and yet we're only tapping
into a fraction of it.
And similarly, with
our brain capacity,
we may be using 100%
of it, but we're only
consciously aware of just
that tip of the iceberg.
And so this is about how
do we get more aware?
How do we expand our conscious
awareness and conscious use
of the fullness of who we are?
And how can we do that now
in a way that is sustainable,
in a way that is natural?
You don't need anything really
too much outside of you other
than the proper--
there's a proper sensory input,
because our nervous system
gets wired by our
sensory inputs, but then
how can we do it in a way
that we're really in control,
that we really have the ability
to harmonically do this.
So science calls
it the connectome.
I like to call them bridges.
We're going to build different
bridges within the brain,
and these are going to be tools
that you're going to walk away
with that you can do.
Actually, I have a handout
for you at the end.
It summarizes everything.
But you're still going
to want to take notes,
because your handout's
just one page
versus how much more you're
going to get through this.
And of course, you can
always go and review it
on Gaia for those of you
who are subscribed to Gaia.
So let's start with
ultimately looking at--
now, here we're at the
Conscious Life Expo, right?
So we're looking at our
spiritual potential,
and what is going to be
obvious, I think, to you
by the end is that
science is proving
how the spiritual
practices work now.
So these ancient
spiritual practices
have been around for
thousands of years,
but now today we can
understand why they
work from a scientific place.
So I want to help
weave together all
the different spiritual
practices and how
it is that they really
work for us at a very
physiological level.
So we're going to start with
a couple of definitions.
There we go.
So we're going to start with
a of couple definitions.
Now, the first thing that
I want to define for you
are these terms called--
we have awareness.
We have consciousness.
We have the mind.
We have the brain.
So science today-- they
often use these terms
maybe interchangeably.
They talk about
consciousness and awareness
as being when you're
awake, and when you're
in your phase of interacting
with other people in the world,
and so forth.
And then they say that--
in traditional science,
they're saying that
that consciousness is
a phenomenon of brain
activity, that our brain is
what brings consciousness.
Do you agree with that?
I don't either.
I believe that our
consciousness is primary.
In the hermetic
tradition, for example,
they say the all is mind.
The universe is mental, that
this universe and everything
that comes into
physical manifestation
is ultimately started as an
idea in some universal mind
and then projected somehow
into this physical density.
And so we have-- in
the mystery school
tradition that I work
with, we have a couple
of different definitions.
First, we start with
what we call awareness.
Now, awareness is
that universal field
of the potential
for consciousness.
It's like a pure state of being.
It's eternal.
It's your original self.
And there's an awareness,
but it's almost like
when you're waking
up in the morning.
Your eyes are closed,
and you're just
starting to come
into that awareness,
but all you know is
just I am here, or I am.
But there's-- your
eyes are closed, right?
So there's not necessarily this
active observation of what's
going on outside of you.
It's self awareness, right?
So awareness is that.
It's pure state, and
it's just pure beingness.
It's oneness.
There's nothing but you.
It's all one.
And then eyes open.
Eyes open is what we would
define more as consciousness.
So eyes open means now I see
me, and I see all, right?
And in seeing all,
I can observe.
And we know from the
quantum observer effect,
for example, that
things can come out
of the quantum field
into physical reality
through observation.
So there's this
universal consciousness,
and there's universal awareness.
So awareness starts eyes
closed, just pure beingness.
Eyes open-- universal
consciousness comes in.
And in that consciousness,
now we can observe.
We can discern.
We can identify things.
We can pursue and make
maybe different judgments
about those things--
not judgment from a bad
place, but just judgment,
discerning different
things from each other.
So this is a more active state.
The conscious state is
a more active state,
and so consciousness is
active, whereas awareness
is just beingness, right?
Pure beingness.
And then we have this sea.
So everything in the universe
is this sea of consciousness.
So that consciousness
and that awareness
that underlies it is
primary, and then everything
that comes into being
comes out of that, right?
So forces are set in
motion through though,
through the act
of observation by
that universal consciousness.
And then the other thing that
we have is our brain, right?
So here we are.
Now we're going from this
really cosmic nebulous state
into this very physical state.
So here we are on this side
of things in the physical,
where we have our
nervous system.
We have our brain.
We have our senses.
We have all this way that our
body interacts, and the brain--
again, science--
material science today
says, OK, well,
consciousness comes
from epiphenomenon of
the brain, but I see
the brain more as a receiver.
It receives transmissions,
kind of like your radio.
You have a transmitter
and a receiver,
and there's all these
radio waves in the air.
We don't see them.
We don't perceive
them with our senses,
but they're there
because we know
that, when we turn on
the radio, it somehow
picks up those signals, right?
So your brain is
kind of like that.
It's receiving the channels,
the stations of consciousness
that are floating around
in the atmosphere.
And which channel
you tune into depends
on how you've set your dial,
what frequencies you are
operating at within your brain.
So the brain is--
another way of looking
at it is like a computer.
The brain is like
the circuit board.
It's the infrastructure of
the-- at a tangible level, all
that circuitry.
And then you have--
with the computer
analogy you have your
physical hardware.
Your nervous system
is a part of that.
Your body is part
of that, right?
In a computer, you
have your mouse.
You have your screen.
You have your keyboard.
You have the processing
chip, and so forth.
But then you also have
the user, and the user
is that intelligent
being that wants
to perform certain
functions with that hardware
or that computer.
What else do they need?
>> Software.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> They need electricity,
and they need software, yes.
So they need power, and then
they need the software, right?
They need the interface
that allows the user
to perform those functions
with that computer,
and our computers these days are
getting all kinds of magical,
because they have all kinds of
software programmed into them
that allow us to do more unique
functions with those computers.
So what serves as our software?
>> Cognitions.
>> Thoughts.
>> Brain.
>> The brain is the hardware.
>> Programming.
>> Thoughts.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> What is the programming?
>> Thoughts.
>> Perceptions.
>> Thoughts are coming
from the conscious mind.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> OK, OK.
Now we're tapping in.
So we have what I
would call the--
our soul.
So I'm going to call our
consciousness that eternal,
never ending being.
It's spirit, right?
And then in ancient
traditions, almost all
the ancient traditions
talk about three bodies,
three vehicles.
We have the spirit,
which is eternal.
We have the physical
body, which is mortal.
And we have the soul, which is
the interface between spirit
and physical.
It's like the software.
So your mind operates
through that soul,
and it includes both some
level of programming coming
from the spirit and some
level of programming
coming from the physical.
So the things that
we've learned, we can--
sometimes we call it also our
lower self and our higher self.
This is all contained
within the soul.
So the things we've learned in
this world-- our subconscious,
our negative ego stuff,
our personality stuff,
our coping strategies, filters--
all of those are part of
what we call that lower self.
And that is embedded.
That is programmed into
that software of the soul.
And then we have our higher
self, which is more purpose,
and creative gifts,
and so forth that
are here to fulfill purpose.
And that is embedded also
from the spirit into the soul,
as well.
So we have these three beings.
We have the spiritual,
or the consciousness.
We have the-- an
awareness, which is even
before the consciousness.
That's that intelligence.
And then we have the physical
body, which is the hardware,
and that's the brain, the
nervous system, and so forth.
And then we have this interface
between the two, which
is the mind or the soul that
allows for the programming
and allows for learning.
So it's kind of like
a smart operating
system that learns as it goes.
And this is-- how we
perceive and process really
depends on our soul.
So we have three
levels of being,
and the consciousness
is pure, right?
That spirit, that
eternal being is pure.
I mean, it's infinite.
It's all knowing and so forth.
But here we are in this
physical experience,
and we're not tapping into
nearly that full potential
that we have within us or
that all knowing, wise being.
So what's getting in the way?
What's getting in the way?
So some of you mentioned,
OK, we have our programming
from our psychology, from
our life, our physical life.
And that's part of it, right?
We have our filters.
We have our belief systems.
We have the things
that maybe are
traumas from the
past that have not
been properly healed within us.
And then we have--
on the other side,
we have our actual
physical wiring, right?
Sometimes our physical
wiring gets in the way,
and that's what we
want to address here--
is how do we rewire, because
fortunately we can rewire.
Just 20 years ago, maybe,
we had this mindset
that we were a
slave to our genes,
that you were-- this is
what you're born with,
and you just have to accept it.
And we had this mindset
that we were also
hardwired by a certain age,
and once you're hardwired,
there's no changing it.
But fortunately-- so again,
we were kind of victims
to our upbringing, right?
And fortunately, though, we are
learning more and more today
that we can change
all of it, right?
We can rewire ourselves
all throughout our life,
and we are not
slaves to our genes,
because we have
this epigenome where
we can shift the switches that
are the layers above the genes,
right?
So there's all kinds
of potential for us.
Now, the very first bridge--
so I talked about bridges,
and we're going to talk
about seven bridges here.
And we're going to then
experience a few of them.
So the first bridge is--
it is this.
It is the mind and the soul.
So that first bridge is
going from the consciousness,
that eternal intelligence,
that pure awareness
and consciousness into
this physical body.
And it is through
the mind and the soul
that that bridge is
established, right?
So this is one of those
bridges, and there
are many spiritual
tools, and philosophies,
and so forth for
helping us to address--
psychology also supports that--
to help us address how
our mind is working,
and how our soul is working,
and where we get in the way.
But when it comes to that
mind interfacing with us
into the body, it
comes in through what
I would call intention--
intention.
So when we have a
certain intention,
then that sets things in motion,
and that intention is usually
going to come from
that consciousness,
from that higher consciousness.
And so intention
is the first bridge
that we want to connect with.
What is the intention?
And then in addition
to intention
comes with knowledge, right?
So knowledge meaning
it's not just
like I intend for it to be
this way, because we all
know the power of
intention is very powerful,
but it's not the whole
story, all right?
We have to have the
proper knowledge
of what is even possible,
what tools to be working with,
right?
So seeking that
knowledge-- those
are the things that are
going to really support
that connection within that
first bridge of the mind.
And so seeking proper
knowledge, training your mind
to expand its
possibilities-- because one
of the big things that limits
us is our belief systems
of what's possible.
So by seeking
greater knowledge--
and I personally have
found a lot of value
in the deeper
knowledge that we can
gain from ancient traditions,
because they're tried.
They're true.
They've tested it.
They're fairly
scientific, many of them,
and it's stood the test of time.
So a lot of those tools--
and especially where you see
there's a universal teaching,
universal principles.
And so in those universal
principles and teachings
there's knowledge there that
can be really valuable to us
to expand our mind, and
you're here at an expo
seeking knowledge, seeking these
experiences and these tools.
So this is great.
And then the second
thing that we
want to really work with is
looking at our perceptions.
Now, our perceptions
are going to be filtered
by both belief systems, as well
as by our sensory sensitivity.
So we have two things that
affect our perceptions.
There's the programming
in your mind,
and that programming you
can reprogram, right?
We can re-evaluate
our belief systems,
and we can then
choose consciously
to re-pattern our
belief systems.
How many of you
have ever done that?
It can be challenging
at first, but we just
keep reminding ourselves,
and we keep seeking,
and we keep breaking through.
And we can start to really
have these awakenings
and these ahas.
But the second piece is around
our sensory stimulation.
So what I mean by that is
that each of our senses--
our sight, our smell, our sense
of taste, touch, hearing--
all of our senses have a certain
range of what we are taking
in, what they're--
you can think of your
body as like a detector,
and detectors have a certain
range of sensitivity.
So as that information
comes in, what are we--
how much of it are we taking in?
And then not only
how much of it are we
taking in, how much of
what we're taking in
are we aware of?
And this is where I
said before we take in--
actually, within the range
of sensitivity of our senses,
we take in 100% of information.
But a lot of it just goes
straight into the subconscious,
and the amount
that we're aware of
is just that tip of the iceberg.
Some people say 10%.
So we're aware of 10%, but of
that 10%, just with your eyes,
for example, the
amount that you see--
what we call the
visible light spectrum--
is 1% of the
electromagnetic spectrum.
We're only seeing 1%.
And we're only consciously
aware of maybe 10% of 1%,
so now we're
talking 0.1%, right?
And we used to have
this idea in our world
that seeing is believing.
But if we're only seeing
0.1% of physical reality,
that's its physical reality.
That's not even talking about
the spiritual side of it.
So we're seeing so little
of our reality around us,
but we can broaden that range,
so we can start to maybe--
let's start with perceiving--
can we get to perceiving 100%
of that 1% of physical reality,
instead of just 10%, right?
And then from there, can we
broaden the range from 1%
and start looking,
and seeing things
in the X-ray, and UV spectrum,
and into the infrared spectrum.
Can we broaden that?
And I believe that people
who are clairvoyant
are starting to see that.
They're starting to see maybe
a more subtle range that most
people it's like it washes out.
For example, I just saw
an article the other day
that was really beautiful,
where it's a photographer who
goes out at night at dark--
as dark as it can be.
She goes out at night, and she
takes a UV light out with her.
And she goes, and she
photographs plants
under the UV light at night.
And it is incredible
what happens,
because they take
take in that UV light,
and then there's this
phospholuminescence that
comes out, and there's
these amazing colors
that these plants glow
under the UV light.
And she photographs that, and
that is happening all the time.
So when the sun is
shining during the day,
there's UV light coming in,
and it-- and these plants
are coming with these
amazing colors and glows,
but it's so overwhelmed by the
sunlight that we don't see it,
but it's there, and yet
we could start to see it.
So this is where clairvoyance,
that seeing energy--
and you, your body, you're
emitting light all the time.
We have something
called biophotons
that our DNA and cells emit.
And that bio-- those bio photons
are in the visible range,
but they're just-- their
amplitude is so low,
the strength of that
light coming out
is so subtle that it
just gets washed out,
and we don't normally pay
attention to the subtleties.
So one of the other
really big things to do
is to not assume anything,
because assumption
is the enemy of perception.
Assumption is the
enemy of perception.
So really look.
Really train yourself to
look, to notice the details,
to feel and to
really pay attention.
This is just one example of how
our sensory range is limited,
and yet can be expanded.
And this is just
with vision, right?
We also have what we--
a range of what we feel,
a range of what we hear, a range
of what we smell and taste.
And all of these senses
can be exercised,
and those different senses--
they feed into your
nervous system.
They feed it, and
they're charging up
your nervous system.
And then that nervous system
communicates that to the brain,
and it charges up the brain.
So we're constantly taking
in energy, and stimulus,
and information from
our environment,
as well as from our
consciousness, our soul.
It's coming in through the
spiritual realms, as well.
So we have all this
energy coming in,
and one of the
things that I really
like to encourage
people to become
is to become more
multi-dimensional--
to become a multi-dimensional.
Now, if you can think
of all this stimulus
that we have coming in
through the physical and all
this higher guidance,
and insight,
and wisdom coming
in from that higher
consciousness, and
that spirit, and we
have multiple different senses
that we can perceive through--
in our energy body, we
also have spiritual senses.
We have magnetic energy,
and we have etheric energy,
and we have an aura,
and we have the chakras.
We have all these
different energy
systems that are kind of
like the nervous system
to your soul.
So these are senses, as well.
They're just different
types of senses.
If you've ever experienced
where you've been maybe
in rush hour traffic,
or you've been out
at the mall or something,
and there's someone who--
you just get this sense.
You don't see them.
You don't hear them or anything,
but you just get the sense.
And all of a sudden
you look, and you
see that somebody was
staring right at you.
Has anyone had that
experience before?
Yeah.
So that-- how did
you pick up on that?
>> Extrasensory perception.
>> Yeah, extrasensory
perception.
I would call that through
your energy field,
that your aura was feeling their
energy and their intent coming
through your energy
field to you.
And you picked up on that, so
that is what we would call more
your spiritual senses.
So we have all these different
dimensions of the mind,
and there is many,
many levels, right?
And I have an image
of the tree of life
here on top of
this mind to depict
that, because in the tradition
that I study in Kabbalah,
the tree of life shows
us the dimensions
of the mind and the soul.
And the bottom-- the very
bottom of the tree of life--
I don't know if
this has a pointer
on it-- but at the very
bottom of the tree of life
is the physical.
It's like the very, very, very--
there's 1 out of 10 spheres
on the tree of life is
representing the physical,
and all the rest of it--
so there's seven of
them that represent
the mind and the soul.
And then there's three of them
that represent the spirit.
So there's seven
dimensions to the mind,
and these include things
like subconscious,
your rational mind, your
intuition, your creativity.
It includes higher self
and connection to that.
It includes higher
discernment, and love,
and sense of altruism.
There's all these different
dimensions of the mind.
And all the
dimensions of the mind
are ultimately about
helping us orient
our sense of self in relation
to everything else, right?
Now, our mind-- here's
a nice quote for you.
Our mind can-- this mental
and emotional framework--
it can be our ally, and
it can really support us,
and it can be a vehicle for
transcendence and expanded
states, but it can also
be our greatest enemy
that gets in our way, depending
on how we've trained our mind.
So again, we have all this
huge spiritual potential,
but if we haven't done the
work to train, and mature,
and harness the
power of our mind,
it's likely to not work for us.
So this is where having
a spiritual practice
supports, right?
Learning to meditate supports.
Learning to harness
your will and what
you're choosing to focus on--
these disciplines really support
you in training your mind.
It's kind of like--
I like to think of the mind
like a puppy, where you have--
when you have a puppy,
it's kind of-- it's cute,
and it's-- but it's
a little unruly.
It's going to go tear things up.
It's going to go piss in
whatever corner it wants.
You leave it alone for a
little bit, and you come home,
and you're like, oh my god,
what did you do to my house?
But when you train
it, and you're
persistent and consistent,
and positive reinforcement
obviously is better than
negative reinforcement,
and you continually work with
it to become your friend,
now that puppy is
going to be very loyal.
It's going to support you.
It's going to give
you the warnings when
you need the warnings.
It's going to be
your best friend.
So your mind is like that,
and we need to train it.
Now, in the Western
mystery tradition,
the working with Kabbalah,
working with alchemy,
working with hermetics
is all about that process
of training the mind.
And in the Western
tradition, we actually-- we
learn to master the mind,
and we go straight into it.
It's like we look at it
like a scientist would
look at their experiment.
How does it work?
Let's take it apart.
Let's figure out
each component of it,
and then let's figure out how
it all works together and put it
all back into its
proper framework.
And so in these traditions,
we're going into the mind
to learn to train
it and master it,
whereas certain other
traditions goes around the mind.
It's like, let's just
bypass all that thought
and go around it so that it
just doesn't get in our way.
And that's fine.
You can go around the mind if
you're living in the ashram,
or if you're in the cave,
or up a mountaintop,
and you're not dealing with
people and the world, right?
But if you're in life, in the
world, then we have to engage.
Our mind is going to be
engaged all the time.
And so we need to learn to
master it and train it properly
so that it can work for
us rather than against us,
and-- but it can become
this amazing vehicle
for transcendent states.
And that is what I have
found in the Western mystery
school tradition-- is through
hermetics, alchemy, Kabbalah,
working with sacred
geometries, and so forth
we really learn how to master
and train the mind properly.
So I mentioned before this
idea of a radio, right?
So we have these
stations of consciousness
and thought being broadcast
in this field of--
or this sea of
consciousness and this field
of collective consciousness
that we live in.
And then you also have it
coming in from your spirit.
And the radio-- how we
turn the dial on the radio
is through intention.
So by your will,
by your intention,
you just choose what
you're going to tune into.
And you can shift the
dial, and you can--
it could even be that easy.
You can imagine, for
example, a thermometer,
or you could imagine
the radio dial.
And I'm going to shift now
into this higher frequency.
I'm going to shift into
this grounding frequency.
this middle frequency.
You can just imagine
it like that.
Do a visualization process.
And then we have to know,
what are the options
to tune into, right?
We have to know what stations
are even available to us.
And all of this, how
this works in the brain,
is through what we call
oscillatory energy.
So your brain has different
neural firings that happen,
and as different individual
neurons start to fire,
and then those neurons
start to fire together,
it creates sort of a
bigger neuronal pattern.
And then it becomes
a wave, and then
that wave sweeps from the
local area of neurons,
and it starts to sweep into
other areas of the brain.
And we-- in maybe
more common language
we call this brainwaves, right?
But these are neural
oscillations or frequencies.
It's energy.
And so intention and
knowledge is the first step.
Now, when we grew up, we grew
up in a very stochastic way,
right?
We had chaos.
We had traumas.
We had incomplete
experiences and learnings.
The way our society is
today-- our upbringing,
our wiring from the
beginning wasn't always
the most harmonious or balanced.
And that wiring
starts from the moment
that we're in utero, right?
The wiring of the brain
starts from in utero.
So those energies that were--
we were exposed to even when
we were in utero affects
the wiring of the brain.
Now, fortunately, it can
continue after birth,
and the wiring of
the brain happens
through different stages all
the way up until about age 25.
And at age 25, we
start having what's
called the myelination,
and the white matter--
the gray matter.
So it comes in, and it
starts to hardwire more.
But we also have something
called neuroplasticity,
which allows us to rewire.
But rewiring takes some
effort, because you
need to put in energy, and
you need to be consistent.
And of course, there's the
work that Joe Dispenza does,
for example, which is talking
about the neuroplasticity
and what fires together,
wires together.
I mean, this is a
pretty common phrase
within the whole
neuroscience field.
What fires together,
wires together.
So through our behaviors,
through certain sensory inputs,
we can fire off different
neurons and pieces
of our nervous system.
And then if we continue to
use those in a harmonious way,
we can actually
rewire the brain.
So what we need to do
is-- there's two things.
One, we need to
stop the old firing,
the old patterns
that we don't want.
You need to-- that's
where our mind comes in.
Stop.
That's one of those intentions.
If you find yourself
in a tailspin,
stop, and then redirect.
And start using a
tool, or a practice,
or some kind of method--
it could be an
affirmation, but I
think awakening
the senses really
supports, because your senses
feed straight into your brain.
So we want to figure
out ways to rewire
this nervous system and the
brain patterns to support us,
to become more harmonious, and
to be more interconnected so
that we can access
those peak states.
And we want to do it in
a way that's sustainable,
meaning you have
control over it and you
can use it any time of day.
It doesn't need to be
through some kind of mind
altering kind of drug
experience or whatnot.
It's like you can
just-- this is you.
The power is within you.
And all the ancient traditions
say that the greatest power
actually is within us.
So there's our first
bridge, and then action
is what's needed to rewire.
We need to really put
the practices in place.
And in that brain-body system
through the neuroplasticity,
we have this ability to adapt
all throughout our life.
You're never too old to change.
And so all throughout
our life we
can use practices that
will intentionally fire
the brain in a healthy way.
And so we're going to look at
a couple of different options
for creating those
neural rewirings,
and for establishing harmonized
frequencies and brainwave
patterns, and then tuning it
in to different frequencies.
So the frequencies that
your brain operates at
go anywhere from 0 up to about
100 Hertz, or beats per second.
And the slower the frequencies
tend to be more meditative,
sleep oriented,
deeper states of--
away from ego and self
kind of consciousness
and into just these
more expanded states.
The higher frequencies tend
to be more about this is me,
and this is that,
and it's in this sort
of outwardly focused state.
So how many of you
are familiar with
the different brainwave states?
Most of you have had
some exposure to it.
The thing about brainwaves is
that you can have brainwaves
set off, and you can have these
neural oscillations happening,
but if they are not given
an ongoing external source,
they'll dissipate.
So something might trigger it,
but if that external source--
or it could be an
internal source,
meaning you doing
something-- but if it
isn't continuing to
be exposed to that,
then the waves dissipate.
And that's just friction.
That's just what happens
within our physical world--
is the energies will
kind of fade off.
So what we want to do for
sustained brainwave entrainment
is to continue to introduce a
harmonious source that gives it
that rhythmic push.
It's like a swing.
If you're pushing
a child on a swing,
and you just give
him one big push,
they're going to
swing back and forth,
and then they're going
to come to a standstill.
But if you just keep
pushing in the right rhythm,
then it keeps on swinging,
and the fun continues.
So we want to work with
this concept of entrainment.
So really briefly,
entrainment means
that different systems
that have the ability
to oscillate, or
resonate, vibrate
at different frequencies--
if you-- for example, if
you strike a tuning fork,
and you bring it to within
a certain physical range,
physical proximity of
another vibrating system that
has the ability to vibrate
at the same frequency,
they will start to
vibrate together.
They will entrain.
And so this entrainment is
a thing that we can use.
It's very well known
in science, and we
can use it to stimulate the
brain into those expanded
states.
There's a whole new technology,
or field of technology--
it's called neurotechnology--
that's all about that.
How do we stimulate the
brain through sound?
brain through light frequency
patterns?
How do we stimulate the brain
through vibration patterns
like physical
vibrations, smells?
So all of these
neurotechnologies
that are trying to hack
the brain in certain ways
to achieve those
expanded states--
those are what we
call neurotechnology.
Now, there's also
the power within.
You can use, for example,
breath work, meditation, chants,
Your own voice for the
chanting, but in a rhythmic way.
Rituals, qigong and tai chi.
All of these things
are things that you
can generate within
yourself that
create what we would call--
well, in the ancient tradition,
we'd call it internal
alchemy, inner alchemy,
where your body actually
becomes this alchemical factory.
And it works with
the endocrine system.
It works with the energy field.
It works with the
nervous system.
And it will stimulate the brain.
So all of these
spiritual practices--
I call them tools for life.
Yes, we have our sort of modern
technological ways of hacking
our body, but these
ancient spiritual practices
were very sustainable
ways of accomplishing
these neural systems.
Now let's get into how
the brain develops,
because this is where some of
what I keyed in on is unique.
So I had this vision
at one point of,
how do we really
reprogram the brain?
Because in our conscious
mind, our intentional state--
it works from what we call
the prefrontal cortex.
And the prefrontal cortex is the
most human part of the brain.
It sits right here
behind your head.
It's about 35% of
your brain mass
is in the prefrontal cortex,
but it's the most human part
of the brain.
And that is where we have what
we call our executive function,
our executive-- our
ability to choose,
to discern, to be abstract,
to set intentions,
to be goal oriented,
and so forth.
And so from our choices
today, how can we
then rewire the brain?
And I had this
realization as I was
studying the brain
that the brain develops
in a certain way.
It develops in the--
from the fetus,
it develops from the bottom up,
so from the deep brain stem up.
It grows like a tree, and then
from the back to the front.
So the brain develops
bottom up, back to front.
And as we grew up,
we were programmed
with that development, right?
So our foundation is
in the brain stem,
and then it grew up from
there and forward from there.
And those correlate
with different phases
of our life, different ages.
For example, we
have our late 20s--
or early 20s is when
our prefrontal cortex
most developed.
And then you have your
cortex in the teens,
and you have your limbic
system in your pre-teens.
Those are fun times.
[LAUGHTER]
And then in your
childhood and in infancy,
you have the old brain
and the brain stem.
So depending on
what was happening
during those times
in your life, that
determined the wiring and the
foundations of your brain.
So if we want to
rewire the brain,
we need to work in
the reverse order.
We need to work from where we
have conscious control-- so
from the prefrontal
cortex, front to the back,
and then from the top down.
So we're going to trace our
way through that sequence,
from the front to the back,
and then the top down.
And this will then--
as we do this, we're
going to figure out
which are the tools
that we can use
to support the different
areas of the brain.
So prefrontal cortex--
as I just mentioned, is--
you can see here.
It's the most executive
part of the brain.
They call it the
executive center,
and it's that front most part.
And the whole just
tapping on your head
is going to stimulate
your prefrontal cortex.
It's what is most
distinguishes humans.
Our prefrontal cortex is--
I think it's like twice the
size of the lesser apes and five
times the size of dogs,
of the canine species.
So we have much more
executive control,
and here is where intention,
deliberate orchestration
of our activities of
the day, goal setting--
all of these types of
things happen here.
And the prefrontal
cortex actually
is growing and
developing from birth
all the way up
until 25 years old.
And what it does-- what's unique
about the prefrontal cortex
is that it hooks in to all
the other areas of the brain
so that it can control them.
So what makes us most
human is our ability
to have this executive function.
What makes us most animal is
when we get into survival mode,
and our old brain hijacks
our prefrontal cortex.
So when we-- we just
go into reaction mode,
and we don't have as much
control-- self control.
And even though we think we
should be rational, we can't.
That is when our deeper
parts of our brain
are hijacking our
prefrontal cortex.
So we want to be able to
maintain executive function.
So that means we need to
reconnect from the prefrontal
down and back.
And in the Taoist tradition,
the whole brain area
would be called what they
say is the upper dantian.
Dantian is like energy centers,
really important energy centers
that we want to develop.
So when it comes to working
the prefrontal cortex, first
of all, we need to remember
we have right hemisphere
and left hemisphere.
Right hemisphere
and left hemisphere
are all about balancing, right?
So most people are either right
brain dominant or left brain
dominant.
They tend to either
be more creative.
If they're right
brain, they tend
to be more creative, more
intuitive, more nonlinear, more
emotional, maybe, but
very much in the capacity
for relationships.
And they learn through
those dynamics.
And then you have your
left brain people,
who are more analytical,
logical, language and numbers
oriented, and so forth.
So the idea-- the
ideal, I should say,
is not to be right brain
or left brain dominant,
but to be whole brain,
to have equal access
to both left and right,
and really the whole brain.
So we want to learn
how to balance, right?
So I'm going to call this second
bridge, the balance bridge.
And this second bridge--
it actually is a physical bridge
right between the hemispheres.
It is what we call
the prefrontal chiasma
and the corpus callosum.
And so that's the connectivity
between the hemispheres.
Scientists have studied
Einstein's brain quite a bit
to try and figure out what
was so special about him
and his brain.
And one of the things
that they found
was that he had a really
thick corpus callosum.
The connectivity between the two
hemispheres was really thick.
He also had a much
larger prefrontal cortex
than most people.
So these were just
one little example
of how we want to
really develop this.
Now, prefrontal cortex
really has a good connection
to the gamma range of
brainwaves, which is anywhere
from about 30 up to 100 Hertz.
And so when you're
listening to gamma
frequency range, binaural
beats, isochronic,
that kind of brainwave
entrainment technology--
do you know how brainwaves
work, like the binaural beat
technology works?
Who does not know?
Just-- OK.
So the idea between
binaural beats
is that you put one frequency
in one year with headphones
and another frequency
in the other ear.
They're different.
So your right brain says,
oh, I'm hearing 500 Hertz,
and your left brain says,
no, we're hearing 510 Hertz.
And they're going
back and forth,
and back and forth,
and back and forth.
And over the corpus
callosum, they're
trying to find agreement, but
they can't find agreement.
So what happens inside the
brain is an interference signal
between the two.
So it's the
difference of the two.
So it would come up with
a 10 Hertz beat that
is not coming from the outside.
It's your brain is producing it.
So it's forcing
the two hemispheres
to talk to each
other, and then it's
forcing them to find
agreement with each other.
And as soon as they find that
difference between the two,
that 10 Hertz beat, or whatever
it is that you're turning it
into, that then sweeps
across the brain,
and it harmonizes everything
into that frequency pattern.
So this is how binaural beat
brainwave entrainment works.
And they also have isochronic.
Isochronic is where
it sounds like it's
sweeping back and forth,
and then it kind of creates
an entrainment that way.
And then there's
monochronic, so there's
different ways of doing--
using sound to create
brainwave entrainment.
And so in the gamma range,
anywhere from 30 to 100 Hertz,
but there's in particular--
there is this 40 Hertz peak
in the gamma frequency.
And that 40 Hertz peak is
observed to synchronize
the whole brain in a
very holistic fashion.
And not only that, it's sweeps--
so it comes actually up from the
thalamus, and the hypothalamus,
and hippocampus area.
So it comes from
the deeper brain.
It sweeps up to the
prefrontal cortex,
and then sweeps back down.
And it even goes down, and
it unifies into the heart,
as well.
So this gamma frequency
of around 40 Hertz tuning
is a really important whole
brain neural synchronization
pattern that we
want to work with,
and I believe it
really will support us
with balancing and wiring
up that corpus callosum
and that prefrontal.
Now the rest of the cortex--
so you can see the prefrontal
is kind of right before the ears
and then forward,
but then you have
the rest of the cortex,
which goes back from there.
The cortex is going to be the
upper ranges of the brain.
Again, you have the right
and left hemispheres.
So the rest of the
cortex tends to operate
at the beta frequency
range, anywhere from I
think it's 13 to 30 Hertz.
And when it comes to
stimulating these--
we're going to do
an exercise here.
When it comes to
stimulating these,
your prefrontals really
are very active when
your eyes are open--
so visual cues-- visual cues.
And then also when your eyes
are closed, and you're in REM
sleep--
so when your eyes
are really active,
but there's inner
visual cues happening.
So when there's REM,
and then also we
can stimulate through tapping.
You could tap either
right above the eyebrows,
or you could tap right in the
hairline, right above the eyes.
So kind of in line
with your pupils.
You can do tapping here.
So we're going to do a
bit of an exercise here,
and I am playing music that
has gamma-beta frequencies
behind it, just so you know.
It's called "Illuminations" by
J.S. Epperson and the Monroe
Institute.
So just take a moment, and look
at this with your eyes open.
Look at the center of
the Fibonacci spiral.
Just find whichever one is
easier for you to look at.
And with your eyes
open, you're going
to take your left index finger.
We're going to be doing a
little bit of brain gym here.
Take your left index finger
to your right prefrontal,
maybe right in the hairline
there or above the eyebrow,
all right?
And you're just
going to tap, and you
want to tap kind of fast.
And just breathe while
you're looking at the image.
Now let's try the other one.
So right hand, left prefrontal.
Try to get it right above your
eye, right above the pupil,
either just at the eyebrow
or in the hairline.
Breathe and look at the image.
Now, you don't need to do this.
You can do this.
Again, looking at the image,
both together, so you're
kind of tapping them
at the same time.
And breathe.
And now tap just right
on your third eye.
Right there is the
prefrontal chiasma.
And breathe.
What do you feel?
>> Really vibrant.
>> Relaxed.
>> Vibrant.
Relaxed.
>> I saw the waves move.
>> You saw the waves move?
So you saw the image moving?
>> I thought I saw
it like -- do a spin.
>> Your brain did a little--
a little loop de loopery.
>> Can you feel a little buzzing
in your prefrontal cortex?
It feels good, right?
>> Yeah.
>> Simple, yeah?
So this is just tapping,
breathing, looking at an image.
You could use any
image, but make it
imagery that is colorful.
Mandalas are great for that.
Sacred geometry
is great for that.
You want it to be a harmonic
image, though, right?
So you're looking for balance.
So usually those images should
be symmetric in some way.
This one's not
exactly symmetric,
but it was cool, but some kind
of sacred geometry, or mandala.
Very symmetric, very harmonic,
and yet a lot to look at.
Very stimulating.
And then the tapping
and the breathing.
And the reason we
do left to right
is because your right
hemisphere controls
the left side of your
body, so I wanted
to just stimulate one hemisphere
at a time at first, right?
So same thing.
We're cross laterally
wired, and then
when we're doing it
together, it's similar.
And then just the middle, which
is the bridge between them.
So this is just
an example of how
we're going to keep working.
So now we're going to come
to the temporal lobes.
So we're going to go through
the rest of the cortex,
and, again, the cortex is
all about balancing the two
hemispheres.
Now, your temporal lobes
are sitting kind of right
around the ears, and
we're going to work
with another bridge here called
the rewire and refocus bridge.
So as we go away from
the prefrontal cortex
into the rest of the brain,
we're still balancing,
but we're rewiring
and refocusing.
So there's connective circuits
between the prefrontal cortex
and the temporals, between the
prefrontal cortex and the--
what we call the
parietals, and then back
to the occipital lobes.
And so here, with
the temporal lobes,
what do you think might be
the sensory input that most
stimulates them?
>> Sound.
>> Sound, right?
Because they're
right by our ears.
So the temporals are
processing sound.
And what's pretty amazing
now, that sound can be words.
It can be non-sensical, meaning
just sound-- just grunts,
and moans, and things like that,
any kind of social interaction,
because people are social, and
they communicate through sound.
So a lot of our social
interactions and relationships
are going to be wired in through
the pre-- the temporal lobes.
So with your
temporal lobes, the--
it'd be better to do
a beta frequency here,
but we're going to now
do a tapping again.
This is a little bit--
but we're also going
to do a toning.
So the tapping point is right
above the tops of the ear.
Actually, you could do
right on the temples.
Let's do the temples here.
So the temple-- and it's
right in the hairline again.
So first of all, again, we're
going to do the similar thing.
So take your left,
and we're going
to tap the right temple
right in the hairline,
and we're going to tone ah.
Ah.
When you're tapping, it's kind
of from the corner of the eye
right into the hairline.
Let's do it again.
Ah.
Do the other one.
And now we're going to town oh.
Oh.
One more time.
Now tap together, and
we're going to tone mm.
Mm.
One more time.
Now we're going to
put it all together.
Ah.
Oh.
Mm.
I know I'm making you do a
little bit of brain gym here.
Now tap-- tap the--
so from your temples
up to the top, aum.
One more time.
Aum.
Notice how you feel.
Just take a scan.
How was that?
>> Lighter.
>> Different from
prefrontal, right?
You can feel it now all in here.
So another tool.
You can work from
one to the next.
I'm going to start powering
through some of this.
So your ear is an
amazing instrument.
Your ear is an amazing tool
for bringing in energy.
Your ear is fully
developed in utero--
in utero.
And so it's one of the
first sensory organs
to come board for a developing
baby, and so they can hear.
They're taking in
energy and information
from the environment,
and the first thing
that the baby's brain entrains
to is the mother's heartbeat.
And that's through the ear.
So the heartbeat is
entraining the ear,
which then feeds into the
brain and entrains the brain.
And so the fetus is
developing first with this--
the heartbeat tends to be at
a delta range of frequencies.
And your ear is never
shut-- it never shuts down.
Your eyes will close
when you go to sleep,
but your ears never do.
And they're constantly taking
in information and energy,
unless you put in ear
plugs, which mutes that.
But they're constantly
working and charging up,
and that your ear has
three more times--
three times more connections
to the brain than your eyes do.
So the ears have a lot more
influence on your brain,
actually, than what you see.
And not only that,
but from the ears,
that auditory nerve
feeds directly
into every organ of your body.
So what you're hearing
is feeding directly
into every organ in your body.
So do you think it's
important what we listen to?
Uh-huh.
Yeah.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Well, not a lot of things.
So again, you want to
bring in harmonious sound.
So as much as you can
be surrounding yourself
with harmonious
sounds, the better.
When you're out in traffic, put
on some really classical music
or something that's
really settling,
rather than the heavy
metal or hip hop.
And I mean, they're fun,
but put on stuff that's
going to be-- because when
you're out in traffic,
it's chaotic enough, so you
want to do something that's
going to help calm you down.
And when you come
home from your day,
put on, again, some kind
of music that's harmonious.
It can be upbeat but
make it more world--
and just really harm--
rhythmic and harmonious.
And when you put in
music with lyrics,
it's going to stimulate
left hemisphere more so
than right hemisphere.
So when you have
music without lyrics,
then it's equally
stimulating both,
hemispheres because
your language
centers that process words
are in the left hemisphere.
So this is one thing--
and then the power of the
ear-- in auricular therapy,
where it's acupuncture
for the ear,
they say that ear looks
like an inverted fetus.
So they can treat
the whole body just
from different acupressure and
puncture points on the ear.
So your ear is like a little
microcosm for your macrocosm
of your body.
Hemispheric
entrainment-- so there's
many ways that our brain
can become entrained,
and there's something
called biomusicology,
which is to synchronize
the rhythms of the body
into an external sound.
So for example, a drum
beat, or a didgeridoo,
or those types of ancient
shamanic gongs, and chimes,
and all of those
types of things.
So sound healing has been very
well known for a long time,
and then now we
have-- and I explained
the biannual beat and
brainwave entrainment method
to you just a few moments ago.
So we also have now
the neurotechnologies.
Now, music without
lyrics that's harmonious
automatically harmonizes
left and right hemisphere
of the brain.
So any kind of harmonious
music without lyrics
is going to automatically put
you into a more whole brain
state, but then if you want
to specifically entrain
into certain frequency
levels, then you
need to introduce the right
type of frequency patterns
for the brain to entrain to.
So now we're going to shift
to the parietal lobes.
Now, the parietal lobes are sort
of where the top of the head
curves over to the back, and
the parietal lobes really--
they're, again,
part of the cortex.
They have a lot to do with
our sense of orientation
and perception of space, so
the sense of space around us
and our orientation
within space.
And when the parietal
circuit actually
goes into a harmonized
activity or a minimal activity
is when people tend to be
in that meditation state,
and they lose a sense
of space and time.
So as we shift to
the parietal lobes,
we're now starting to shift
from the outer to the inner,
all right?
So we want to
now-- this is where
I call it the refocus bridge.
We want to shift
from outer to inner.
So we're going to refocus
towards ourselves, and it's--
a lot of that has to do
with closing your eyes.
So we're going to start
minimizing the outer stimulus,
closing the eyes, and we
can still do some tapping,
but we're ultimately trying
to take ourselves inside.
So this is actually best.
And then we'll have
the occipital-- now,
your occipital--
at the back of the head,
the occipital lobes actually
process visual information.
So when you close your
eyes, what happens
is that the activity in the
occipital starts to reduce.
The beta brainwaves
start to reduce,
and your brain becomes
flooded by alpha waves.
So the alpha waves go more
from like 7 to 13 Hertz,
and so the alpha is where we
get into a light meditative.
You can guide a visualization,
but your eyes are closed,
and you are going to feel
more lightly relaxed.
And it sort of opens up
more intuitive centers,
and so forth.
So we want to--
the best way really to do this--
we're not going to tap.
We're going to actually
suppress the stimulation,
and that would be just to go
into closing the eyes, focused
breathing, and quieting down.
And you could have
some music on,
but I would make it
like a really low drone.
We don't have too much time for
this right now, but ultimately
I would say 5 to
10 minutes of what
we call passive meditation,
where you're just
emptying your mind--
that really helps
shift us to the back.
And your eyes are closed.
And quieting down,
and so let's just
take just a minute to do this.
So just close your
eyes for a moment.
And take a few deep breaths
in through the nose,
out the mouth.
And just focus inside.
Focus into your breathing,
shifting your focus
from outer to inner.
Tune into more subtle realms.
Quieting the mind, and
just coming into a state
of calm and gentle relaxation.
And then taking a deep breath,
just come back for a moment.
Open your eyes.
How does that feel?
>> Good.
>> And that was just not
even two minutes, right?
So you can see--
can you start to see
how you could weave
these together
into sort of stimulating the
upper parts of the brain,
taking you back
further and deeper,
and then go refocus
to the inner.
And now we're going
to start going
from the cortex, the upper
range of the brain that we see,
into what we call
the limbic system.
We're going to start
going inward to the brain
and deeper into the brain.
So this is all-- you can weave
all of these little exercises
that we're talking about,
and doing, practicing here.
You can weave them
together into a practice
that you can do for 10
minutes, 15 minutes every day,
and it will really stimulate
and help you rewire your brain.
So the fourth bridge is what I
call the introspection bridge,
and the fourth bridge is
bridging from the cortex,
meaning the upper regions of the
brain into the limbic system.
And the limbic system
itself is a bridge.
It's sort of the middle
part of the brain.
And the limbic system is--
it's a gateway into
our emotions, right?
So limbic controls the
emotional side of our being,
and it connects very strongly
in with our endocrine system,
which as you may
or may not know,
the endocrine system relates
directly to your chakras.
So each of your chakras
has an endocrine gland
that it connects with,
and the more we stimulate
those endocrine glands
and the chakras,
the more it creates
this internal alchemy
within our body, because
the endocrine glands control
our hormones, which then
controls all kinds of things--
our mood and so forth.
So with the limbic system,
it's controlling emotions.
It's also-- and mood.
And it's also controlling
our autonomic nervous system,
so sympathetic, parasympathetic,
the nervous system,
and the sort of parts of
us that we're usually not
conscious of that are
regulating the body.
And it gives us-- when
we have good connectivity
within our limbic
system, it gives us
the ability to relax at will.
When you don't have
good connectivity
within the limbic system,
there might be tension.
There might be anxiety.
It's harder to relax at will
when those situations come up.
So this is a really
important part
of our being to get
a good connectivity
to so that we can
control how we feel,
no matter what's happening
around us, right?
And we can maintain a
sense of emotional balance
and centeredness, and we
can de-stress at will.
And using tools like meditation
is really helpful for that.
So alpha waves dominate here
within the limbic system,
and when you're in this--
when you're connecting
more to the limbic system,
it's going to feel a
little bit daydream-like.
And you can easily be off on
an imaginative journey, guided
imagery.
And it's often that transition
between waking and sleeping,
as well.
So you get a lot
of nice feelings.
You get some imagery
that comes in here,
and I think that this--
I call it the
introspection bridge,
because, again, we're shifting.
We've just shifted from
the outer to the inner.
We've refocused
towards our inner,
and now here introspection is
about really getting in touch
with how do I feel?
How do I feel?
And so when we
are introspective,
we can get more in touch
with our own inner being.
And so a lot of zen
meditation, just
sort of that quiet meditation,
guided imagery, tai chi,
qigong, yoga-- all
of those are going
to help you connect in to more
of an alpha brainwave state
and start tapping in
more to how you feel.
Do you want to know what
sense, besides hearing,
affects your limbic
system the most?
Any ideas?
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Smell.
Smell.
I don't know if any
of you could smell it,
but we were trying to
give you a little bit
of a boost of essential
oils while you're
in your little meditation.
And so your sense
of smell directly
connects to the limbic system.
So using things like
aromatherapy with high grade
therapeutic grade
essential oils is
really good for stimulating
your nerve-- your limbic system
and emotions, right?
So emotions are stored
here, emotional memories.
So when you want to release,
or heal, and re-pattern
old emotional traumas,
use aroma therapy.
And then also use the more
calming meditative type
of music that really gets
you into that alpha brainwave
state.
We use peppermint
and eucalyptus just
to kind of perk us
up a little bit,
but you could go with
any essential oils that
are calming.
Chamomile is really good.
Lavender is really good,
but use essential oils
often for supporting you
with your limbic system.
And then the other
thing that I like
for the limbic system is
the solfeggio frequency
tuned music.
And the solfeggio frequencies
are a little bit more--
they stir the emotions
in a certain way.
So music that is tuned
specifically to any of these--
they're not a system
of themselves.
You wouldn't do
solfeggio music that
works these as the
notes on the scale,
but the way the solfeggio
frequency musicians are working
is they take one of
these frequencies--
let's say the 528
Hertz frequency--
and they make that be
the sort of the base tone
that they then develop
the scale from.
And so music that is tuned
to the solfeggio frequencies
really stirs things.
And each one kind of
stirs a little bit
of a different energy.
Some of them are really
good for transformation
and emotional release.
Some of them-- the
528 Hertz is said
to be the miracle frequency
that really talks to your DNA.
And the higher frequencies--
as you go higher, they get
more and more celestial,
and more spiritual.
As you go lower, they
get more grounding.
So all the solfeggio frequencies
are really good to work with.
And just purely by
the fact that they're
different from our
normal tuning scale--
that, in and of itself, is
going to rewire your brain,
because you're--
through the sound,
through the music
you're training
yourself to listen
to frequencies
you're not used to,
and that challenges the brain.
And so I really
believe in the power
of solfeggio frequencies--
the 444, as well, even though
that's not a solfeggio,
but a lot of healing
frequencies are based on that.
And Pythagorean tuning,
which is more based
on perfect fifths
of a tuning scale.
So different tuning
scales can really
support you with challenging
the brain to really shift.
I actually created an album
called creative alchemy.
It's a meditation album that
works with all the solfeggio
frequencies.
There are seven different
steps in the meditation.
It's a guided imagery.
The musician is
J.S. Epperson, who
I've collaborated with
on a couple of projects,
and we have all the different
solfeggio frequencies in there.
And it relates to different
steps in the creative process
that I'm leading people
through in this meditation.
So it's all about helping
you with manifestation,
problem solving,
creative insights,
and so forth, and accessing a
higher state of consciousness
to then bring those
insights down into a plan
and into action.
So we're going to keep
pushing forward here.
Next we come into
the deepest part
of the brain, the old
brain, or the brain stem.
And here I call it
the doing bridge,
because the brain stem is
all about your actions.
It's patterned ways of being.
This is really the
foundation of the brain,
and it has to do
with the things we
do every day, the things
we say every day, just
the habitual way of living.
So it's our habits.
And if we want to
really get into greater
mastery of our lives, we have
to recognize, number one,
we are creatures of habit.
We're going to have
habits, but we need
to have habits that support us.
So doing things like a spiritual
practice, meditating every day.
Having some form of rituals--
ritualized behavior
programs the deep brain.
So rituals are going to be more
of a patterned way of doing
things that-- but bring
it with intention.
It's an intentional way of
doing things in that pattern
so that it really supports us.
Now, at the-- sitting at the
very top of the brain stem
is some core structures--
the pineal gland,
the pituitary gland,
the hypothalamus,
and thalamus glands, as
well as the hippocampus.
And these structures are said
to be the seat of consciousness
within the body or
within the brain.
And I think that
seat of consciousness
is in every cell of your
body, but these glands--
the pineal, pituitary,
and hypothalamus gland--
are really sitting right in
between the limbic system
and the brain stem.
So they are the bridge
between, and when you're deeper
in the brain stem,
usually you're
more unconscious or asleep.
But as we get into
the limbic is where
you start to wake up, right?
So it's a transition place.
So these are gateways.
And we actually have
a panel at 12:30,
the Lisa Garr panel on science
and consciousness that I,
and Gregg Braden, and a bunch
of other scientists and people
are-- we're going to be
talking about the pineal gland.
So it's very much about
this intuitive center,
but all of these are like that
central core of our intuition
that we can tap into here.
And this system, the brain
stem, is somatic, right?
So it's your
somatosensory system.
So it controls sweaty palms, the
hairs standing up on the back
of the arm or the neck, your
heart rate, your breathing
rate, where you're breathing.
All of those things are
somatic, and this is
controlled by the brain stem.
So somatic therapies are
really good for helping
rewire your brain stem,
as is breath work,
as is the tapping, right?
So the physical sensations.
And when we get into a theta
brainwave frequency, which
is from 3 to about
7 or 8 Hertz, that
is when you're really
getting into the old brain.
So theta is actually
the goal of meditation.
Guided visualizations don't
typically get us into theta.
They keep us in alpha, but when
you get into a deeper state
and you maintain conscious
awareness, that's
the goal of meditation--
is to get into theta and hold
it for as long as you can.
Sometimes we're
only hitting theta
when we're just
transitioning to sleep,
and we're just there
for a few minutes,
but if you can get
into that state,
and then hold it,
and prolong it,
now you're going to be
able to get a really--
it's a deep healing state,
a very deep healing state.
Your body goes into what we call
the trophotropic healing state.
So you want to really
work with that.
The meditation practice is
about getting into theta.
I did create another meditation
album called "Quantum Insight"
that is a deep theta
meditation state.
It's just breath,
and visualizing fire
and water coming together in
an alchemical kind of process.
It works the chakras, but it
is very much about accessing
this kind of deeper state.
So it's more somatic
in its nature.
And then getting you
into that quantum zone,
because when you
can get into theta,
now you're really
achieving a coherent state,
and now you can
really start to tap
into that universal
mind and that expanded
state of consciousness.
So this doing bridge is actions,
but it's also deep meditation.
And when you can
train yourself to get
into that deep meditation
and stay conscious,
now you can really
start to access
expanded states of awareness
and that universal mind.
So again, here's a
breathing technique
I encourage that
will support you.
We're not going to
practice it right now,
because we're
running out of time,
but I'm going to suggest--
and it supports you
getting into theta.
So you're going to breathe
in through your nose
to a count of five.
You're going to
hold your breath,
and you're going to pull
it down into the hara.
And you're going to hold the
breath for a count of 10.
And then as you
breathe out, you're
going to do a slow, deep
out breath with your mouth
open to a count of 10.
So in through the nose for five.
Hold it for a count of 10.
And then as you breathe
out through the mouth,
long and slow breath
to a count of 10 out.
And you just do
that for a while,
and you will find yourself
dropping into theta pretty
quickly.
And it's in that holding,
the space between things
where you're really going to
start accessing a more quantum
state.
And then it takes
us from the brain,
and we start dropping
into the heart.
So the heart is
also a brain center,
and there are a lot of neurons,
and glial cells, and so forth
in the heart, just like
there are in the brain.
And in fact, your heart--
your heart started beating
before your brain did.
So your heart is more
primary than the brain,
but our science today is
so focused on the brain,
and the only people that
I know that are really
trying to bring out
the wisdom of the heart
is the HeartMath Institute
and the people who
are reporting their results.
So we want to really
sink into the heart.
And of course, the
heart's energies
are about gratitude,
love, compassion.
We're getting really
deep into delta.
So that's like-- most people
when they're in delta--
they're in a coma, or
they're deeply asleep.
But I know that you can train
yourself to actually maintain
conscious awareness when
you're in delta, and--
but in that delta state, you
would lose all sense of self.
You would be merging
with the universal.
You would be in a great
state of gratitude,
and compassion, and total
heart-brain coherence.
And with the heart, it
puts out a really big
electromagnetic field,
bigger than the brain.
It comes out at--
they can measure it out to about
three feet out from the body,
but I think it goes out
much further than that.
And the heart--
I mentioned before how
the brain was in Taoist
qigong is the upper dantian.
The heart is the middle dantian.
And then the hara, or the
gut, is the lower dantian.
So these are major
energy centers,
and what's fascinating is that
science today is realizing
they're all connected
in very strongly
to the central nervous system.
So the heart is the brain.
The gut is a brain.
The brain is a brain.
And so these are all centers of
consciousness within our body.
So when we can really
get into that delta state
and into that deep connection
to the heart and gratitude--
gratitude brings us into
a coherent state that
unifies the mind and heart.
And when we then
send out compassion--
so the Dalai Lama's meditators--
they did some studies
on them, and they
went into a deep theta state,
and then maybe even deeper.
And then at some point they
switched from feeling gratitude
and compassion within themselves
to sending that compassion out
to the world.
And when they started
sending that compassion out
to the world, they
registered a gamma frequency
that came up, and
then swept forward,
and swept back and down.
And so it created this very
unified mind-heart state
of being.
So gratitude is your key for
tapping into the heart field
and just centering your
focus into the heart,
breathing into the heart,
and really slowing down
the brainwaves into
a deeper state.
And then finally,
the seventh bridge
brings us into the very center
point of that energy field
flow.
And the center of--
I know we'd like to see
the center is the heart,
but the center is
actually your hara.
The actual center of gravity
of your body is right here,
and in tai chi, qigong,
all of that-- everything
moves around this
point here, the hara,
which is about an inch, inch
and a half below the navel.
So the very center
of that toroidal flow
is accessed here in the hara.
So once you've come from
the brain down to the heart,
you want to then focus
your breath into the hara.
As if your eyes are
down here, you just
bring your whole attention
down into the hara and breathe.
And then at some
point, just like you're
focusing in on that
space between things,
the gap, the zero point--
and you're surrendering into it.
That's your final
step, the final bridge.
And as we do that, we
are then able to access
that full expansion
out into the universe.
You will feel
yourself-- the micro--
the macrocosm within
the microcosm.
You will feel that the
universe is within you,
and you are one
with the universe.
So you really lose that
sense of self here.
And so this final key
is about stillness, just
coming into that
place of stillness.
So that's why I say
focus on the breath
between as you shift your
focus into the hara, because--
and in ancient traditions,
they call that the void.
When you breathe
into the hara, it
helps you most strongly
connect to the void.
So that void is just emptiness.
It's nothingness, right?
And so the ultimate
expansion beyond the self
is this final key of stillness,
but within your body,
you can wire it.
And then no matter what's
happening through your day,
if you're ever--
if you have a practice of this,
where you're bringing yourself
from the front to the back,
and down, and down, then,
no matter what's happening
throughout your day,
you can easily just do a
few breaths and a few taps
into these areas.
And it'll automatically start to
shift you back into that state,
so but we need to
do daily practice
to get it wired so that it's
so readily available for us
to do it like that.
And it doesn't need
to take very long.
So you can think of,
again here, the macrocosm
within your own field,
within your own microcosm.
And the chakra system,
again focusing on--
from the brain to the
heart to the hara,
so going from the upper to the
middle to the lower dantian.
And focusing on
the space between.
This is just a little
bit of connection
in today's modern science
between the brain and the gut.
The other two meditation
albums that I have are--
the other thing I
wanted to tell you
is that the upper dantian and
the middle, and the lower all
relate to the tree of life,
as well, on the middle pillar.
The top of the tree is
like the upper dantian.
The middle of the tree of
life is the middle dantian
And then the hara is--
you sew it on the tree of life,
and then that's more actually
at the feet.
It's the root of the feet, but
it's usually more the feet.
So it's interesting to see
how these traditions are all
aligning.
We have the ancient Taoist
tradition with the dantians.
We have the Kabbalistic
tradition in the middle pillar.
We have modern science.
And they're all pointing to
these same points in our body.
And so here's just
a little summary.
We have some
handouts here that we
are going to pass around
that just give you
the summary of each
of the seven bridges.
And hopefully a few of the
exercises are in there,
and hopefully you also took some
good notes on those exercises.
So I want to just thank you all
for joining me this morning,
and hopefully we'll see you
again at the panel at 12:30.
And I hope that you enjoy
the rest of your conference.
So thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]